---
title: ProblemSet 1 -- Optimization
author: George McNinch
date: 2024-09-20 
---

1. An optimization question in auto manufacturing
------------------------

An automobile manufacturer makes a profit of `$`1,500 per unit on the
sale of a certain car model. It is estimated that for every `$`100 of
rebate, the number of units of this model sold in a given month will
increase by 15%.

a. What amount of rebate will maximize the manufacturers profit for
   the month? Model the question as a single-variable optimization
   problem.

b. Compute the sensitivity of your answer to the 15%
   assumption. Consider both the amount of rebate and the resulting
   profit.

c. Suppose that rebates actually generate only a 10% increase in sales
   per `$`100. What is the effect? What if the response is somewhere
   between 10% and 15% per `$`100 of rebate?

d. Under what circumstances would an offer of a rebate cause a
   reduction in profit?
   

2. Oil spill, again
-------------

Recall the problem about oil-spill cleanup described in [the class
notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/github/gmcninch-tufts/math87-notebooks/blob/master/01--optimization.ipynb)

The task was to decide how many *external clean-up crews* to hire in
order to minimize the total costs of the oil spill. The notebook above
described the solution to this problem with the following parameters:

* $m$ = miles cleaned per crew per day = $5/7$
* $f$ = fine charged per day = \$10,000
* $TC$ = travel costs per outside crew = \$18,000

Describe the changes in the argument required to handle the case in which
the parameters are changed to:

* $m = 0.6$ miles /day
* $f =$ \$20,000 /day
* $TC=$ \$20,000 /crew

a. How many external crews must be hired to avoid a fine?

b. How many external crews must be hired to minimize the total costs?

c. What must be changed in the calculus-based argument found in the
   notebook confirming your answer to b.?

d. Use ``matplotlib`` to produce a graph of the total cost function
   $C_{\operatorname{tot}}(n)$.  Be sure to consider the utility of
   your choice of the interval for values of $n$ in your graph.
   
   (To get a usable copy of your image, you can proceed in a few ways:
   
   - if you produce the graph in ``colab`` you can ``right-click`` on
     the image and ``Save As`` a file on your file system.
	 
   - if you work in ``python`` on your computer, you can save the
     image via a command like
	 
	 ```
	 >>> g.savefig("my_graph_image.png")
	 ```
	 )
	 
3. Blood typing
--------------

Human blood is generally classified in the “ABO” system, with four
blood types: `A`, `B`, `O`, and `AB`. These four types reflect six
gene pairs (genotypes), with blood type `A` corresponding to gene
pairs `AA` and `AO`, blood type `B` corresponding to gene pairs `BB`
and `BO`, blood type `O` corresponding to gene pair `OO`, and blood
type `AB` corresponding to gene pair `AB`. Let $p$ be the proportion
of gene `A` in the population, let $q$ be the proportion of gene `B`
in the population, and let $r$ be the proportion of gene `O` in the
population. Observe that $p + q + r = 1$.


a. [The Hardy-Weinberg
   principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardy%E2%80%93Weinberg_principle)
   implies that:

   > $(\clubsuit)$ The quantities $p$, $q$, and $r$ remain constant from
   > generation to generation, as do the frequencies of occurrence of
   > the different genotypes  `AA`, `AO`, ... .

   Assuming the validity of $(\clubsuit)$, what is the probability
   that an individual has genotype `AA`? `BB`? `OO`? What is the
   probability of an individual having two different genes?  Express
   your response using the quantities $p$, $q$ and $r$.

b. Still assuming the valiidty of $(\clubsuit)$, find the maximum
   percentage of the population that can have two different genes.
   Perform this computation in two different ways:
 
   >  - directly maximize a function of only two variables
   >  - use the method of Lagrange multipliers.

c. Explain in words what the Lagrange multiplier represents in the
   second computation of part (b).




4. Newton's method and root finding
-----------------------------------

a. microprocessors

   One of the uses of Newton’s method is in implementing division on
   microprocessors, where only addition and multiplication are
   available as primitive operations. To compute $x = a/b$, first the
   root of $f(x) = 1/x − b$ is found using Newton’s method, then the
   fraction is computed with one last multiplication by $a$.

   Find the Newton iteration needed to solve $f(x) = 0$ and explain
   why it is well-suited to this purpose. (Hint: We are trying to
   approximate division, so we shouldn’t actually use it...)

b. experiments

   Apply Newton’s Method to compute $1/b$, where $b$ is: (i) the
   last 3 digits of your student number; and (ii) the area code of
   your phone number. For these experiments, report the iterates until
   the approximation is consistent to 10 digits.
